Hello,
welcome to the FxPlug Overview session.
My name is Dave Howell,
and I'm an FxPlug engineer.
And we're going to talk
today about the FxPlug spec.
You'll learn about what
the FxPlug spec is,
what the SDK is, and why we developed it.
And we'll talk about how to
write your own FxPlug plug-ins.
First, the FxPlug spec is a new FxPlug-in
architecture that we've introduced.
It was created by the
Apple Pro Apps team,
and the first host app,
which was recently, just last month,
released is Motion 2.0.
Now, we developed a new plugin
architecture for quite a few reasons.
There are other ways to write
plugins that will run in motion.
We wanted to add features that we
think plugin developers need to
really make their image processing
algorithms and effects shine.
So, some of those are unique things
that we want in our own --
that we have in our own apps,
like the dashboard in motion.
And taking advantage of things
like the fact that the motion
app renders its canvas in OpenGL.
So,
you can render custom on-screen controls
right onto the canvas in OpenGL.
Hardware acceleration,
there isn't another image processing
effects plug-in architecture that lets
you do hardware accelerated plug-ins.
We wanted you to be able
to take advantage of
Core Image and OpenGL itself,
and Core Graphics, Quartz Extreme.
So another thing is that most plugin
architectures are cross platform.
And a disadvantage of that is that the
people designing it need to use the
least common denominator between the
different apps that between the different
platforms that the plugins will run on.
And we didn't have to do that.
We were able to leverage
strengths of the Apple platform.
All the things that you've heard at the
other sessions here at the conference,
things like first class
adoption of OpenGL,
core image filters,
and creating interfaces using AppKit and
Interface Builder and Objective-C itself.
Now why did we go and use Objective-C?
We wanted to be able to use both in
our design of the architecture and also
to support in your plug-ins all of the
elegance of C++ without the problems
that you get with subsequent versions
of the GCC compiler like the application
binary interface changing from one
version to another or the fragile
base class problem that CCC presents.
Objective C helps with that.
And of course we wanted you to
be able to access AppKit and
Core Image in particular.
And to use Interface Builder,
which integrates nicely with the
classes in your controllers and views
when you're doing custom parameter UI.
So reasons that you might want to
write FxPlug plug-ins and port any
plug-ins you may have to the FxPlug
SDK or develop new plug-ins in our SDK.
One is that even though at the moment
we're only supporting FxPlugs in Motion,
there are plans,
we plan to support them in Final Cut.
And between the two apps,
over a third of a million users
are waiting to buy your plug-in.
Another thing is that if you've
already got a plug-in that's
running in software only mode,
you can use OpenGL and use
Core Image Filters to accelerate your
plug-in and get really dramatic results.
Another thing is that the custom UI that
we are supporting lets you use all of
the app kit and NSView and NSResponder.
and David Koehn.
Thank you, Dave.
So, we're going to start off with a quick
overview of the FxPlug code that you
would put into an app of your own,
into a plug-in.
And finally,
the on-screen controls that I mentioned
that you can render controls onto
the canvas surface itself to let
people directly manipulate your points
and shapes and outlines or motion
paths or whatever you have in your
plug-in without having to present
them separately in an inspector.
So that's all supported in FxPlug.
So to get right into it,
we want to show some things that have
been done with the FxPlug spec before
coming back and talking about some
of the details of writing your own.
And to start that out,
we have Ben Syverson from DV Garage.
Ben Syverson: Hello.
Hi.
So I'm just going to show you,
going to show off DVMAT here and just
talk a little bit about the process
of importing a plug-in which was
an After Effects plug-in to Motion.
Okay.
So let me just play this and
get this loaded up into RAM.
Okay, so this is our base plate.
Let's go ahead and turn on DVMap Blast.
Actually what I'm going to do is
delete this from the stack and add
it so you can see how easy it is.
Alright, okay, hang on.
Okay,
now what we do is just pick a high color.
This is all pretty even.
Pick a low color of the screen,
which might be down here.
Switch this over, and there you go.
And this is, you know, HDV footage,
this is running in, well,
pretty close to real time here.
If we turn this off, which we don't need,
we can get up to, you know,
30 frames a second on
HDV footage keying in real time,
which is, you know,
just something you would not
be able to do in software,
and probably something you'd
have to spend about $200,000
for about six months ago,
so.
So yeah, this is, well,
let me show you some of the
sort of features of DVMAT.
Switch this over to Primat RT,
which is a built-in real
time keyer in Ocean.
And if we zoom in,
you can kind of see some of these
artifacts on the side of her face,
and sort of down by the shoulder.
If I switch back to DVMAT,
you should be able to see.
It's, you know,
it's doing it pretty clean.
So, yeah, I came to FXplug without any
OpenGL programming experience,
and without any, you know,
you make these ARB fragment programs,
which are, you know,
sort of pseudo-assembly
for the graphics card,
and I had no experience with that either.
You know,
I just have done strictly software,
you know, only image processing.
And within a couple of days,
also I had no Cocoa experience,
and within a couple of days,
I was able to get, you know,
basically this version of DVMAT going,
just by, you know,
sort of figuring out what, you know,
how you make that sort
of mental mapping from,
you know, going pixel to pixel,
to doing sort of, you know,
processes that go,
that take in entire images.
And so, you know, I think that's kind of
So yeah, it was a really fun experiment,
and obviously I'm very
pleased with the results.
This same frame rendering in the
software version of DVMAT takes anywhere
from two to four seconds to render.
So now it's going at 30 frames a second,
which is, as a developer,
it's just so gratifying to see
your stuff running that quickly.
You have to spend a little
bit more time developing,
but once you get over that hump,
you realize this is where you want to be.
It's very exciting,
and now I'm going to pass
you off to Pete Warden,
the graphics wizard from
Apple's Motion team.
Yeah, thanks, Ben.
Thanks, Ben.
So I'm just going to give you a little
idea of some of the variety of things
that you can actually do using FXplug.
Since we are just opening
up the whole of OpenGL,
I'm just going to show you
another plug-in from another
third-party developer,
somebody who's been active in other image
processing apps and has been porting
over-- Boris has been porting over their
filters to using the FXplug architecture.
So you can see here,
You can imagine anybody who's got any
OpenGL experience will know that this
is very straightforward just to do
this sort of 3D rendering as long as
you've just got an OpenGL context.
You can see the sort of speed,
we're running at 30 frames a second.
And doing these sort of like
3D effects running in Motion,
because we're just giving you an
OpenGL context to render into,
you can use all of the
OpenGL rendering capabilities.
And so you can get these sort of 3D
filters and any 3D effects that you
can imagine really doing using OpenGL,
you can do as FxPlug filters.
And I'm really excited to be seeing
some of the stuff that people
are going to be coming out with,
and some of the stuff that
we've been seeing already.
Okay,
I'll pass back to Dave for the slides.
Okay, so you've seen what you can do,
and now we'll talk about
how you go about it.
There are five basic steps
in writing your own fx plug.
And at the very top level,
those things are choosing
an Xcode template,
which in order to make
this an easy transition,
we've shipped two Xcode templates
that make it easy to get started.
One is a filter, and one's a generator.
And it's not very much
code to start out with,
so it's really a matter of taking
your code and putting it in there.
Next thing you need to do is edit
the unique IDs in the Info.plist.
If you don't do that,
your plugins will probably...
One plugin that you write will
conflict with another one,
so you need to follow that step.
It's an easy thing to forget to do.
And you'll need to
customize the source code,
of course.
If you've got an existing C function,
you can just call that as a first pass.
Ideally, of course,
you'd implement an OpenGL path as well.
The other part of customizing your source
code is to edit the parameter list.
The render method that you edit,
that you change,
there's one or two render methods.
You may either implement a
hardware path or a software path,
or both.
And finally,
you build and install and test
in the Motion application.
So, to sort of step you through that,
you go to one of these two,
the FxPlug Filter or
FxPlug Generator templates.
Choose that.
So, we'll start with the project.
We'll change the name,
and that will change the name of the
project and the resulting plug-in,
and all that kind of thing.
[Transcript missing]
Now, editing the unique IDs is a bit
tedious because you have to go
to the terminal to enter... to
type UUID gen to make it UUID.
So, I recommend creating an Xcode script.
This isn't installed by
the Fxplug SDK installer,
but it's pretty easy to do,
and the documentation
explains how to do it.
It's a file that contains
texts that you can,
I believe, copy out of the documentation.
And it basically just issues the UUID gen
command and pastes it into your text.
So you select one of the existing UUIDs,
and in this case,
it's set up to be command shift U,
and it will type in a new UUID for you.
So when you open up the info P list,
you need to change two UUIDs.
One is the ID of the plugin itself.
And the other is the idea of the
group that the plugin falls into.
And those are groups like normally
you would use like the name of your
company or product line as the group.
It could be blurs or stylized
or something like that.
And you define what group
you're going to appear in,
your plugin will appear in,
with the dictionary
inside the info P list.
So in addition to editing
the UUID of the group,
you also need to edit
that for the plugin.
Now there are two UUIDs in the plugin.
One of them identifies the plugin itself.
And the other points back to the group.
So you need to use a copy
of the group UUID there.
Fortunately,
there's comments right in the info.p
list that sort of step you through that.
Customizing the source code, of course,
is very simple.
It takes about six seconds,
as you can see.
Taking the filter and editing it.
What could be easier?
Seriously, the editing,
we'll go into that in more detail,
but if you have an existing algorithm,
the first pass of doing this
is really straightforward.
If it's just a C function that renders
a frame or that filters a frame.
The next step of moving to OpenGL,
of course, depending on your algorithm,
it could be impossible or
difficult or very easy.
The next step of
building/installing your plug-in,
I have another tip for
doing the installation,
which you're probably using in your own
plug-ins if you're writing plug-ins now,
which is just to create a SIM link that
points from the FXPlug folder into the
place where your built products go and
just do that once using a line like this.
This is also in the documentation.
But the plug-ins go into
library/plugins/fxplug or your home
directory library/plugins/fxplug.
And that's where
Motion will look for those.
And finally, the next time you launch
Motion after building,
assuming that that link is in place,
you'll just be able to test
your plug-in and step through
it and put breakpoints in,
and so on.
Now, to the details of that one step
that I kind of glossed over
about editing your source code.
An FxPlug is a type of ProPlug.
And ProPlug is a generic plug-in
architecture that we've developed
in ProApps that is an extension
of CFBundle and NSBundle.
And we developed this so that we
could support dynamic as well as
static plug-in registration and
add support for host APIs that
can be retrieved from a plug-in.
This is similar to a callback suite
in some of the legacy plug-in specs.
And the host APIs might be available
in one host app but not in another one,
so this lets you request an
API that you might be able to use.
ProPlug helps you with that.
It has some support for
retrieving host APIs.
The way Proplug is designed,
most of what we do is with protocols.
We define protocols that you implement,
and we define protocols that a host app
implements in a Proplug architecture.
And so FxPlug itself defines
two basic plug-in protocols,
one for a filter and one for a generator.
You would implement those,
implement a class that
conforms to those protocols.
And the host app provides,
there are a few different
host app protocols.
There are some for
creating parameter lists,
one for retrieving parameter
values or setting parameter values,
and so on.
And we'll talk more about those.
ProPlug is defined in the
Plugin Manager framework.
The Plugin Manager framework
is very simple.
There are only two
protocols defined in it.
One of them is for doing
dynamic registration.
If you're just going to put
your plug-ins into a bundle,
which is the normal course,
you don't need to use the dynamic
registration protocol at all.
You can simply ignore it.
If you are going to use it,
then you need to
You might use dynamic registration if
you wanted to look for certain conditions
before deciding whether to load plug-ins.
If you wanted to only load some
of the plug-ins in your bundle,
that kind of thing,
you have multiple plug-ins in a bundle.
And of course the plugin manager defines
a protocol for retrieving host APIs in
the pro API accessing header file.
[Transcript missing]
If you're doing dynamic registration,
there are five different
methods that you can use to
[Transcript missing]
So, host APIs.
To get a host API you need
to first get the API manager,
and when your plug-in's
principal class is initialized,
it will be initialized with
an initWithAPIManager method.
And that passes in an object that
conforms to the pro-API accessing
Dave Howell, Pete Warden,
and Dave Howell, Pete Warden,
and Dave Howell,
So once you have the API manager around,
you can then use the
APIForProtocol method,
give it the name of the protocol,
and get back the protocol that
you want to use from the API.
In this case, we're getting the one for
retrieving values of parameters.
And we then call-- excuse me-- we
then call a method GetFloatValue,
which is one of the methods
defined by this protocol.
You'll see more of that
as the session goes on.
Now, the FXPlug SDK-- once you
understand the ProPlug bit,
the FXPlug itself, the SDK is--
Each of these things I've
listed here is a header,
and there's one for the FX filter
and one for the FX generator,
which are the primary protocols that you
would conform to to implement a plug-in.
The next thing that you might
or might not use is on-screen
controls and custom parameter UI.
And the host APIs that you
might want to retrieve and use,
you'll always use the parameter
API header for creating,
setting, and getting parameter values.
You might use the optional
parameter API if you're doing
certain kinds of parameters,
if you're using histograms
or gradients specifically.
And of course you might
do on-screen controls,
you would get the host API for that.
And you might want to do re-timing,
in which case you would
use the temporal image API.
There's a layer info API,
which is very simple just for getting
position information about an input.
And in addition to all those protocols,
we also define a class.
So creating parameters.
Your plugin needs to implement
a method called Add Parameter.
Add Parameters, excuse me,
that's defined in both FX filter
and FX generator protocol.
And it will be called when
your plugin is instantiated.
It will use the FX parameter
creation API to add each parameter.
And there's a method for each different
kind of parameter that you would add.
And you can see here we're
adding a floating point slider
and then a point parameter.
And I'll go through each of
the types of parameters that
you can create very briefly.
Here's the floating point slider.
This is the way it
looks in the inspector.
Of course, you can also animate most of
these in the timeline as well,
and see them in the dashboard.
So this long method here is what
you use to add a floating point
slider to your parameter list.
You can add an integer slider,
which is the same thing obviously,
but integers.
You can add a checkbox,
which we call a toggle button.
And an angle slider,
which lets you define,
like the other ones,
a minimum and maximum angle and
the default value and so on.
I haven't mentioned this,
there's a parameter flags value
that you can pass in to set
characteristics of each parameter,
like whether it's visible or if it's
enabled or if it's to be saved or
not saved when a project is saved.
If it's to be suppressed or
included in the dashboard and
whether it has custom UI or not
and a few other flags like that.
You can add an RGB color
or an RGB color with alpha.
And a 2D point here, this is shown open.
The 2D point is an interesting
one because it automatically
is given on screen controls.
And of course a pop-up menu.
In this case the default
value is an index,
and the menu entries is an array
of strings for the menu items.
And you can create an image well that
a user can drag images or movies into.
Now the most interesting
one is the custom parameter.
Two things you should keep
distinct is custom parameters
and custom parameter UI.
You can create a custom
parameter with no UI at all.
It can be completely hidden,
and it might have its values set by
something about external conditions,
or it might have its values
set by an on-screen control.
But it doesn't need to have a custom UI.
I think in most cases it would,
but you can think of a lot of uses for
a custom parameter with no UI at all.
In this case,
you can see because there's no explicit
support for a text-type parameter,
you can create a custom
parameter that does text.
And then you can completely control
how it works because you're creating
an NS text edit view control.
So you can respond to the methods in that
view in its controller however you want.
You can limit the length.
You can add features for capitalizing
or not capitalizing or whatever.
Next we have the group parameter,
which is not really a parameter,
but it does have a name.
It's the way you create a hierarchy of
parameters in your add parameters method.
And the group
[Transcript missing]
And I'm going to gloss over the
gradients and histograms because
we'll talk about them more in the
FxPlug in-depth session tomorrow.
But you can create a
gradient or a histogram.
Now to get a value of a parameter,
you use the FX parameter retrieval API.
So you go to the API manager
and request that parameter,
and then call a method
to get a parameter value.
You might do this in your render method,
you might do it in response to an
action in one of your custom views,
or to an on-screen control.
And likewise, setting values is done by
the FX Parameter Setting API,
and there's one method for
each kind of parameter.
Now we want to talk about
how you do rendering,
and I'm going to hand off again to
Pete Warden from the Motion team.
Thanks Dave.
Okay, well,
I'm actually one of the engineers who's
worked on a whole bunch of the filters
that we use internally to motion.
So what I'm going to be talking about
now is OpenGL rendering specifically.
The CPU based rendering will be
very familiar to anybody who's
ever had to deal with a bitmap.
But the OpenGL rendering
is a bit of a new world.
It's really not something
that anybody else is doing.
So there's an awful lot to talk
about as far as the details.
And a lot of those I'll be going into
tomorrow in the FxPlug in depth talk.
But I just want to give you
like a whistle stop tour of the
fundamentals of how the rendering
works in OpenGL with FxPlug.
But also, just before I do that,
I just want to do a little
bit of evangelization for
doing these OpenGL FxPlugs.
It really is a hell of a lot of fun.
We've done 60 or 70 in Motion,
and just seeing the speed increases,
as Ben's example shows,
going from like one frame every two or
three seconds up to 30 frames a second
really is something astonishing to see.
But also,
what I think is really exciting is
the kind of new possibilities that
actually having OpenGL rendering
being in there opens up.
Could everybody who's actually
an OpenGL programmer who knows
some OpenGL put their hands up,
just so I get an idea?
Now, if you imagine,
I'm sure a lot of you guys have
got your favorite little effects
or demo effects or just little,
you know, sort of maybe a couple of
screens of code that really
does something that looks cool.
But there really isn't, you know,
you can't write a game just
to put that effect in there.
You know,
you can put demos out on the web,
and you know, we do see an awful lot
of cool stuff out there.
But there's going to be 350,000
people paying customers.
Who may well get very excited
by seeing those effects.
You know,
they aren't people who necessarily
look at all the demo stuff.
So even stuff that you might not
really think much of yourself,
people get very excited to see that.
So there really is some
very strong reasons to be
writing these effects plugs.
And we're already seeing an awful
lot of really cool stuff coming
out of the third-party developers.
So I just really want to encourage
you to really think hard about it.
And I encourage you to really think
hard about doing effects plugs.
Okay.
So.
How do you write a filter
that runs on the GPU?
The real cornerstone of everything
that we're doing in Motion is the
ARB fragment program extension.
As you can see,
we've just got an example here.
It's a pseudo-assembly language
that runs per pixel on the GPU.
It's supported on all the graphics
cards that ship with the G5s,
and is supported by pretty
much most Apple hardware.
Increasingly, most people out there with
Macs will be able to run this,
and that's going to be
increasing as time goes on.
So you write one of these per pixel,
sort of pixel shaders.
And then you just use the
GL calls to actually bind it.
And then all you do is we pass you
an OpenGL context that you end up
just drawing a quad with that pixel
shader bound to it and with the input
texture that we actually give you
also bound to it so that the pixel
shader operates on that texture,
does its processing on those
pixels that we pass into you,
and then you end up drawing the
results into the output screen.
It really is very, very simple.
You can have,
I think the example template
is maybe a screen of code for
the actual render function.
And anybody who's familiar with
OpenGL should really find it very easy.
There's no viewport setting
up or anything else like
that that you need to do.
I'm just going to briefly cover
the different classes that we
give you for passing the image
information back and forth.
FxImage is the fundamental
building block of this.
All it's got in it really is get width,
get height,
some information on the depth,
and the fundamental image attributes.
And then we have FX texture,
which just builds on top of that.
And it really isn't very much
above and beyond an OpenGL texture.
It has the texture coordinates
in there that you need to use,
and not really that much else.
It isn't a big utility class.
And the RAM-based version
of that is FX bitmap.
And anybody who's ever used
a CPU-based bitmap class will
feel very comfortable with this.
You can get the data,
and you can manipulate it, and yeah,
that's about it.
Now we support various
different pixel formats,
all with alpha, all ARGB.
That was a deliberate
decision on our part.
We really didn't want to be
supporting or forcing people to
support many different pixel formats.
We just wanted to keep as
few code paths as possible.
We have the 8, 16 and the 32-bit float
formats that we support.
All of our bitmaps are actually coming
through as pre-multiplied alpha.
Our whole pipeline works
using pre-multiplied alpha.
FX Texture again, like I said,
it's got the texture coordinates
contained as part of the structure
and you pull those back when you want
to actually use that texture to draw.
Now one thing to be careful of is
often the origin is in one corner
and you can just use the width and
height as the texture coordinates
and you can skip actually explicitly
asking for the texture coordinates.
But that gets kind of dangerous
because we do various things,
especially when we're rendering
at different resolutions,
for example for preview or if
the user's decided that they
want to get faster renderings.
So it's very important,
it will appear to work at first
if you don't actually get the
coordinates but you really need to
explicitly check for them if you're
going to have something robust.
All you do is just call bind and
enable functions on these textures,
on these FX textures,
just like you would for a GL texture.
And actually,
you can even get the idea of
the texture if you want to do
stuff more explicitly than that.
And these textures, as I said,
all of our pipeline is
pre-multiplied alpha.
So, I'm going to pass you back to Dave.
So, before we go on to the
more information section,
I just wanted to point out that,
of course, if you've been to the
Core Image sessions,
you've seen that you can write an image
unit that can be used as a plug-in,
and is available in Motion,
and they're great.
If you want to deploy a plug-in
that works across applications
from iMovie to Motion,
It's a great way to go unless you need
some of the specific features that are
In FxPlug but not in Core Image,
such as the on-screen
controls or the custom UI.
[Transcript missing]
So to get the FxPlug SDK,
there's information on the WWDC website,
and there's a download,
but it will point you to the developer
connection where if you go to
connect.apple.com and log in and go to
downloads and look at Apple applications,
there is a FxPlug SDK 1.0.
Just download that and it contains an
installer and a documentation folder.
The documentation folder has
something called the FxPlug Overview,
and also HTML text documentation
that was generated by HeaderDoc,
which is not always the
easiest thing to read,
but it's pretty complete.
So start with the overview
and then the HeaderDoc stuff
is a great reference later.
The installer will give you the
Xcode templates and two examples,
one of which shows how to write a
filter which uses on-screen controls,
I'm sorry, custom UI, parameter UI.
And the other one is a generator that
shows you how to do on-screen controls.
So it's like the custom,
each of those uses a single
custom parameter type which
is just a list of points.
It lets you draw a path.
One of them lets you draw the path
in a simple view in the inspector,
and the other one lets you draw
it on-screen on the canvas.
And each of them is a pretty awful
example of how to write a paint program,
but maybe you could start with
it and give us something great.
In addition to the examples, of course,
there's the framework and the
FxPlug protocols and so on.
Now, there are two related sessions.
If you can come out tomorrow,
we have at 10:30 a.m.
the in-depth session where we'll talk
more about the issues that we didn't
go into too much depth about today.
There's also a brown bag lunch after
that that we encourage you to grab
a lunch downstairs and head up and
meet us on the third floor in the
Pro Audio and Pro Video connection room.
We'll just hang out and talk
about FxPlug and what you can do.
Just as an example of some of
the interesting OpenGL stuff
that we can actually do,
I'm just going to show off a
couple of generator effects.
Just to give some concrete examples
of what I was talking about that
our users are really interested in,
that I think some of you guys can
come out with some stuff that will
hopefully be even cooler than this.
For example, here's...
and David Koehn.
So, we have a water core sticks generator
that's done entirely using OpenGL.
And it's really something that the
software versions are very... It's
never been something that's been
solved very well in the software space,
but actually using the OpenGL rendering
engine and doing polygonal
rendering to actually get this,
it actually turned out
not to be too tricky.
And another example is...
In Motion, we call this Clouds,
but what this actually is,
is a Perlin noise generator.
And just written using Fragment programs,
[Transcript missing]
So finally,
if you have any other questions,
if we could go back to the slides.
Any questions,
you can email Patrick Collins,
who's the technology manager for
this Apple applications track,
at patrick@apple.com.
Or better yet, write to the ProApp SDK.
Only one, it's not ProApps SDK,
there were some people that got
the wrong address before and were
getting an email sent somewhere else.
But ProApp SDK at group.apple.com.
And a few of us who are involved
in the FxPlug project get those
emails and will respond to it.
We don't have a mail list
set up for this just yet.
We're starting with this.